# summary of indices

variable |	explanation	|	variable group	|	variable type	|	note
--- |	--- |	--- |	--- |	---
ID	|	participant's ID code	|	demography	|	n.a.	
age_years	|	age in years	|	demography	|	control	
IQ	|	Raven IQ	|	demography	|	control	
group	|	diagnostic group	|	demography	|	predictor	
expr_vocab	|	expressive vocabulary score	|	language	|	outcome	
sent_rep	|	sentence repetition score	|	language	|	outcome	
AGL_medRT_diff	|	artificial grammar learning online reaction time score	|	statistical learning	|	predictor	
AGL_offline	|	aggregated score from that artificial grammar learning 2AFC and production scores: (2AFC+prod)/2	|	statistical learning	|	predictor	
digit_span_forward	|	digit span forward score	|	general cognitive	|	predictor	
digit_span_backward	|	digit span backward score	|	general cognitive	|	predictor	
PS_vis_RT_med	|	processing speed visual reaction time score	|	general cognitive	|	predictor	|	lower values mean better processing, likely negatively correlates with other indices; can be recoded if necessary
PS_ac_RT_med	|	processing speed acoustic reaction time score	|	general cognitive	|	predictor	|	lower values mean better processing, likely negatively correlates with other indices; can be recoded if necessary
n_back_2_mean_score	|	nback task score aggregated from block 2back	|	general cognitive	|	predictor	

# description of indices

## ID
n.a.

## age_years
We calculated age_years by substracting the date of birth from the date of the first test session.

## IQ

## group
Group means the diagnosis (or lack of diagnosis) of the given participant.
TD = typically developing, DLD = developmental language disorder, ADHD = attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, ASD = autism spectrum disorder.

## expr_vocab

## sent_rep

## AGL_medRT_diff
We tested artificial grammar learning (AGL) by using the modified version of the task of Knowlton and Squire (1996).
The words in the artificial lexicon were 1-syllable CVC nonwords (péf /peːf/, rud /rud/, gán /ɡaːn/, ket /kɛt/, zot /zot/).
34 grammatical strings were generated following the rules of the grammar.
Eight sentences were selected for test strings only used in the offline tasks, while the remaining 26 strings were included in the online training phase.
The task began with the online training phase, in which participants completed a target detection task.
They were instructed to press the spacebar when they heard the target word (péf /peːf/) and the key ‘A’ for every other word.
The training consisted of five blocks: Blocks 1-3 and Block 5 contained the same training strings, while Block 4 contained 26 random strings which were generated by arranging the words of the grammar in a random order.
The strings within all blocks were presented in a randomized order.
Each training block contained the target 42 times, while the random block had 43 occurrences of it.
We measured response times (RTs) for all targets throughout the 5 blocks.
The online task index was given by the average differences between median RTs in the random block and in the adjacent structured blocks: AGL_medRT_diff = (RTBlock4 - RTBlock3) + (RTBlock4 - RTBlock5) / 2.

## AGL_offline
The online training phase was followed by a 2AFC task, in which participants were instructed to choose between two strings; they were asked to select the one that is more similar to the previously heard language.
This task consisted of two blocks: a block testing sensitivity to transition probabilities (TPs) in complete sentences (16 trials, yielding a 2AFC sentence index) and a block testing sensitivity to TPs in sentence fragments (bigrams and trigrams, 22 trials, yielding a 2AFC sentence fragments index).
In the block of complete sentences, the grammatical string was a sentence of the grammar (one of the eight previously selected test sentences, which they have not heard during the training phase).
In this block, each grammatical sentence occurred twice, paired with different ungrammatical sentences, which were in all cases the modified versions of the given grammatical string.
In the block of sentence fragments, 6 bigrams and 6 trigrams were included.
All of them occurred paired with a bigram/trigram of syllables with zero TP, and 10 trials (5 bigrams and 5 trigrams) occurred again by an also grammatical fragment with lower frequency of occurrence in the training.
2AFC accuracy rates were calculated by dividing the number of correct responses by the number of all trials for the two blocks separately.
The second offline task was a Production task, in which participants saw incomplete sentences on the computer screen, and they were instructed to complete them with one of three words provided below the incomplete sentence.
The 24 test trials contained 8 grammatical trigrams and the 8 test sentences.
Each test string occurred in two trials, while the trigrams were presented only once.
Trials varied in the location and the identity of the missing item within the sequence.
The AGL_offline score was calculated as the mean of the 2AFC accuracy and the production accuracy scores ((AGL 2AFC + AGL production) / 2).

## digit_span_forward
In the task, sequences of digits were presented, and participants were instructed to reproduce them by typing them in in the same order.
Tasks started with the presentation of 3 digits long sequences and the length of sequences increased as the task proceeded.
Participants were presented with four trials within each length, and the task was terminated after three incorrect responses within the same length.
The last sequence length with at least two correct responses were considered as the value of digit_span_forward.

## digit_span_backward
In the task, sequences of digits were presented, and participants were instructed to reproduce them by typing them in in reversed order.
Tasks started with the presentation of 3 digits long sequences and the length of sequences increased as the task proceeded.
Participants were presented with four trials within each length, and the task was terminated after three incorrect responses within the same length.
The last sequence length with at least two correct responses were considered as the value of digi_span_backward.

## PS_vis_RT_med
In the task, participants were instructed to look at a blank screen, and focus on the appearance of the image of a ball in the middle of the screen, and to press the spacebar as fast as they could each time when the ball appeared.
32 trials were presented.
We calculated PS_vis_RT_med as the median of RTs in the task.

## PS_ac_RT_med
In the task, participants had to focus on a tone presented via headphones, and had to press the spacebar as fast as they could each time when the sound was presented.
32 trials were presented.
We calculated PS_ac_RT_med as the median of RTs in the task.

## n_back_2_mean_score
In the task, letters were presented individually in the middle of the screen, and participants were instructed to press the spacebar for every item that is identical to the one presented two steps earlier, and button ‘A’ for every other trial.
The task consisted of two blocks, and each block consisted of 60 trials: 10 targets, 10 lures and 40 foils, and participants were instructed to give responses for each trial.
We calculated an n-back task score for each participant by subtracting the rate of false alarms from the rate of hits for both experimental blocks (x = (hit/10) - (FA/50) * 100), and we considered the mean of block scores as an individual n-back task score (x = (score2-back(A) + score2-back(B) / 2).
